add first draft for GCP deployement doc (#1786)
medic/cht-docs: content/en/hosting/4.x/production/google-cloud/_index.md

Reviewer: This is not a new type of deployment.  It's not a peer of k8s or docker, but instead a type of k8s deployment.  We should move this document under the [Kubernetes directory](https://github.com/medic/cht-docs/tree/main/content/en/hosting/4.x/production/kubernetes), so nav is like this:

* Hosting
   * 4.x
      * Producition
         * Docker
         * Kubernetes
            * k3s Multiple Node - VMWare
            * GKE Multiple Node - GCP

---
title: "Production Hosting CHT 4.x - Google Cloud Platform"

> linkTitle: "Google Cloud Platform"

Reviewer: Is this single or multi-node couch?  Assuming single, this will bette match the other document's link title ("_k3s Multiple Node_" - which actually should be VMWare Multiple Node :shrug: )

```suggestion
linkTitle: "GCP Single Node"
```

Reviewer 2: This is written/scoped for Muso, which is a clustered, and the first request we have for GCP.

weight: 10
aliases:
   - /hosting/4.x/production/docker/google-cloud/
description: >
   Production Hosting CHT 4.x - Google Cloud Platform
---

> This for a step by step to migrate or deploy CHT 4.x instance and is the recommended solution  on Google Cloud Platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How to deploy the CHT 4.x on Google Cloud Platform.
```

Reviewer 2: This will include steps to migrate to GCP as it'll have narrow references to properly send data to what GCP calls "persistent disks", and "storage provisioners". Should that portion belong somewhere else?

Essentially, our goal was to write this so Muso could perform their exact tasks by reading through one set of docs and then later on abstract it based on community questions.

## Prerequisites

> Before you can start using  **Google Cloud Platform (GCP)** , you need to meet certain requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can start using  Google Cloud Platform (GCP) to host the CHT, you need to meet certain requirements:
```

> 1. **Google Account:** a valid Google account (Gmail or Google Workspace)
> 2. **Enable Billing & Free Trial ($300 Credit)**: a valid **credit card** (identity verification)
> 3. **Create a GCP Project**: each resource in GCP must belong to a **project**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Google Account:** valid [free Gmail](https://workspace.google.com/intl/en-US/gmail/) or [paid Google Workspace](https://workspace.google.com/pricing.html) account 
2. **Enable Billing**: In GCP, enable [billing](https://console.cloud.google.com/billing), including a valid credit card
3. **GCP Project**: Each resource in GCP must belong to it's [own project](https://console.cloud.google.com/projectcreate)
```

## Template resources, changes required and some considerations

> Let's start writing out the detail as to what and why, and gathering those links on info so the cht-docs PR will be easier.

Reviewer 2: Let's delete these notes

For example, what is the main docker image constraint (base image selection)? Why don't we want to use google-optimized container images, or Amazon-optimized container images? Why do we need to modify u-limit (and link to the relevant couchdb performance doc)

## **Recommendations and considerations**

> ### Why not to use optimized container images and why modify Ulimit ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Why not to use optimized container images and why modify `ulimit` ?
```

> On a system with many databases or many views, CouchDB can very rapidly hit the Ulimit, and this is not possible with either Google-optimized container images or Amazon-optimized container images. [More details for couchDB performance](https://docs.couchdb.org/en/stable/maintenance/performance.html)

Reviewer: While users can create some custom databases or views, these are largely fixed based off CHT Version.  I'd simplify

```suggestion
In CHT deployments with millions of documents,  CouchDB can hit the maximum [`ulimit`](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/ulimit-soft-limits-and-hard-limits-in-linux/). On Google-optimized container images and Amazon-optimized container images it's not possible to increase the `ulimit`. [More details for couchDB performance](https://docs.couchdb.org/en/stable/maintenance/performance.html)
```

This is why we use Ubuntu with containerd (ubuntu_containerd)

### Cluster creation

> #### Zonal cluster

Reviewer 2: Let's add details around the considerations and limitations for this type of decision.

As a system support administrator, the impacts of a Zonal cluster mean there is only 1 control plane server. If that control plane server goes down, I am unable to modify, or create any resources inside the Cluster. The workloads are still running and available to the end-users but the administrator should be aware of the constraint. Easing this burden requires an increase in costs (more control plane server redudancy)

* Pros: Less costly
* Cons: Single control plane in single zone

#### Regional cluster

* Pros: Multiple control plane replicas across multiple compute zones
* Cons: High cost

> ### VPC Network

Reviewer 2: Let's add more details that resolve the original questions from Muso's request directly.

- Add our CIDR
- Small description to why VMs that run containers are in the private subnet

- Add a section for bastion/ssh-jumpbox setup. That's how we will troubleshoot underlying VM issues. We will want to add a VM to the public subnet that includes routes to the private servers. After tomorrow' session, we can fill that out with exact config details or photos showing how to deploy bastion. There's already existing work in cht-core we can perhaps utilize and link to.

Each public subnet contains a NAT and a load balancer node.
The servers run in the private subnets and receive traffic from the load balancer .
The servers can connect to the internet by using the NAT.

#### Private subnets

Private subnets are used so we do not expose CouchDB nodes to internet an not be accessible to anyone. They should only communicate through their internal IP over the private subnet.

#### Public subnets

Public subnet in a Kubernetes node pool is used to allowing direct access to and from the internet. And this is for CHT API and Sentinel.

> #### How is the Kubernetes Engine, persistent data storage, compute engine, base images are related?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### How are Kubernetes Engine, persistent data storage, compute engine and base images related?
```

**Containers** are built from  base images(`ubuntu`, `debian`) , which define the OS and runtime environment and applications are packaged into container images and deployed on Kubernetes.

**Containers** are **stateless** by design, but some applications need to persist data (`databases`, `application logs`) and  Kubernetes provides **Persistent Volumes (PVs)** and **Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs)** to manage storage separately from compute.

So we are using PVs for CouchDB and application logs in this case.

## Install google cloud SDK

**Google Cloud SDK (gcloud CLI)** helps manage GCP resources via command line.

Follow instruction from [here](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install) to install Google Cloud SDK

Below are some basic Commands

```
# Authenticate CLI with your Google account
gcloud auth login

#install kubectl for cluster management
gcloud components install kubectl

# Set an active project
gcloud config set project [PROJECT_ID]

# List VM instances
gcloud compute instances list 

 # List namespaces
kubectl get namespaces
```

## Create and manage Google Cloud Platform project

There are two ways to create a project in GCP

> 1. GCP UI: if you decide to use the UI, follow the steps [here](https://console.cloud.google.com/projectcreate)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. GCP UI: if you decide to use the UI,  [follow these steps](https://console.cloud.google.com/projectcreate)
```

2. GCP CLI: use below command after you have authenticated to your GCP account

   ```
   gcloud projects create my-new-project --set-as-default
   ```

### Create a cluster in GCP project

To create a cluster we can do it either through the UI or CLI

> 1. Create kubernetes cluster
>    Follow the steps [here](https://console.cloud.google.com/kubernetes/list/overview)
> 2. Using CLI
>    1. Enable Google Kubernetes Engine API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **UI:** Follow the [create cluster steps](https://console.cloud.google.com/kubernetes/list/overview) 
* **CLI:**
   1. Enable Google Kubernetes Engine API
```

### NodePool Configuration

Here we will define how many virtual machines we will run, which ones will run the database cluster, and how much resources (CPU/RAM) the virtual machines will have.

We will be creating 2 nodepools, one for the CouchDB cluster, and one for cht-core services (api, sentinel, haproxy, healthcheck, upgrade-service).

##### Base Image Consideration

In the case of a cht-core project with millions of docs in CouchDB, we have ran into issues with open file descriptors. In order to modify this parameter [(ulimit)]((https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/ulimit-soft-limits-and-hard-limits-in-linux/)), we are required to select a modifiable base image (Ubuntu). [More details for CouchDB performance](https://docs.couchdb.org/en/stable/maintenance/performance.html)

Cloud-vendor optimized container images such as Google-optimized container images **and** Amazon-optimized container images do not allow custom bootstrap scripts that modify parameters to the necessary levels to run CouchDB with large document numbers.

Creating a 3 nodepool configuration for CouchDB:
![CouchDB nodepool](./images/nodepool_couchdb_3_nodes.png)

> As noted in the previous paragraph, be sure to select Nodes under your new CouchDB nodepool in the left-side navigation bar. In the node details menu, select `Ubuntu with containerd` for image type, and `n2-standard-8`for machine type.
> 
> ![CouchDB base image and machine types](./images/nodepool_base_image_machine_size.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In "Nodes" in the new "couchdb" pool,  select "Ubuntu with containerd" for "Image type", "N2" for the series"  and "n2-standard-8" for machine type.

![CouchDB base image and machine types](./images/nodepool_base_image_machine_size.png)
```

In order for our CouchDB containers to be placed onto these specific virtual machines we designated for this nodepool, we need to add kubernetes labels to the nodepool, which we will correspond with nodeSelector parameters in our CouchDB deployment templates. 

Clicking on `Metadata` on the left-side navigation bar underneath the nodepool name, we can add Kubernetes Labels.

![CouchDB nodepool kubernetes labels](./images/nodepool_labels.png)

A separate nodepool configuration created for cht-core services.
For the cht-core nodepool, select a 4 core, 16gb RAM machine, 20gb persistent disk, and there is no need to create specific kubernetes labels.

![CHT-Core nodepool](./images/nodepool_chtcore_add.png)

Click on Create Cluster and wait a few minutes for everything to come up!

## Accessing your GKE Cluster 

> #### Install google cloud SDK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Install google cloud SDK
```
